# Python exceptions


---

## 1. Built-in Exceptions

In Python, all exceptions must be instances of a class that derives from
[`BaseException`](#BaseException "BaseException"). In a [`try`](../reference/compound_stmts.html#try) statement with an [`except`](../reference/compound_stmts.html#except)
clause that mentions a particular class, that clause also handles any exception
classes derived from that class (but not exception classes from which *it* is
derived). Two exception classes that are not related via subclassing are never
equivalent, even if they have the same name.

The built-in exceptions listed in this chapter can be generated by the interpreter or
built-in functions. Except where mentioned, they have an “associated value”
indicating the detailed cause of the error. This may be a string or a tuple of
several items of information (e.g., an error code and a string explaining the
code). The associated value is usually passed as arguments to the exception
class’s constructor.

User code can raise built-in exceptions. This can be used to test an exception
handler or to report an error condition “just like” the situation in which the
interpreter raises the same exception; but beware that there is nothing to
prevent user code from raising an inappropriate error.

The built-in exception classes can be subclassed to define new exceptions;
programmers are encouraged to derive new exceptions from the [`Exception`](#Exception "Exception")
class or one of its subclasses, and not from [`BaseException`](#BaseException "BaseException"). More
information on defining exceptions is available in the Python Tutorial under
[User-defined Exceptions](../tutorial/errors.html#tut-userexceptions).

## Exception context

Three attributes on exception objects provide information about the context in
which the exception was raised:

BaseException.\_\_context\_\_

BaseException.\_\_cause\_\_

BaseException.\_\_suppress\_context\_\_
:   When raising a new exception while another exception
    is already being handled, the new exception’s
    `__context__` attribute is automatically set to the handled
    exception. An exception may be handled when an [`except`](../reference/compound_stmts.html#except) or
    [`finally`](../reference/compound_stmts.html#finally) clause, or a [`with`](../reference/compound_stmts.html#with) statement, is used.

    This implicit exception context can be
    supplemented with an explicit cause by using `from` with
    [`raise`](../reference/simple_stmts.html#raise):

    ```
    raise new_exc fromoriginal_exc
    ```

    The expression following [`from`](../reference/simple_stmts.html#raise) must be an exception or `None`. It
    will be set as `__cause__` on the raised exception. Setting
    `__cause__` also implicitly sets the `__suppress_context__`
    attribute to `True`, so that using `raise new_exc from None`
    effectively replaces the old exception with the new one for display
    purposes (e.g. converting [`KeyError`](#KeyError "KeyError") to [`AttributeError`](#AttributeError "AttributeError")), while
    leaving the old exception available in `__context__` for introspection
    when debugging.

    The default traceback display code shows these chained exceptions in
    addition to the traceback for the exception itself. An explicitly chained
    exception in `__cause__` is always shown when present. An implicitly
    chained exception in `__context__` is shown only if `__cause__`
    is [`None`](constants.html#None "None") and `__suppress_context__` is false.

    In either case, the exception itself is always shown after any chained
    exceptions so that the final line of the traceback always shows the last
    exception that was raised.

## Inheriting from built-in exceptions

User code can create subclasses that inherit from an exception type.
It’s recommended to only subclass one exception type at a time to avoid
any possible conflicts between how the bases handle the `args`
attribute, as well as due to possible memory layout incompatibilities.

**CPython implementation detail:** Most built-in exceptions are implemented in C for efficiency, see:
[Objects/exceptions.c](https://github.com/python/cpython/tree/3.14/Objects/exceptions.c). Some have custom memory layouts
which makes it impossible to create a subclass that inherits from
multiple exception types. The memory layout of a type is an implementation
detail and might change between Python versions, leading to new
conflicts in the future. Therefore, it’s recommended to avoid
subclassing multiple exception types altogether.

## Base classes

The following exceptions are used mostly as base classes for other exceptions.

*exception*BaseException
:   The base class for all built-in exceptions. It is not meant to be directly
    inherited by user-defined classes (for that, use [`Exception`](#Exception "Exception")). If
    [`str()`](stdtypes.html#str "str") is called on an instance of this class, the representation of
    the argument(s) to the instance are returned, or the empty string when
    there were no arguments.

    args
    :   The tuple of arguments given to the exception constructor. Some built-in
        exceptions (like [`OSError`](#OSError "OSError")) expect a certain number of arguments and
        assign a special meaning to the elements of this tuple, while others are
        usually called only with a single string giving an error message.

    with\_traceback(*tb*)
    :   This method sets *tb* as the new traceback for the exception and returns
        the exception object. It was more commonly used before the exception
        chaining features of [**PEP 3134**](https://peps.python.org/pep-3134/) became available. The following example
        shows how we can convert an instance of `SomeException` into an
        instance of `OtherException` while preserving the traceback. Once
        raised, the current frame is pushed onto the traceback of the
        `OtherException`, as would have happened to the traceback of the
        original `SomeException` had we allowed it to propagate to the caller.

        ```
        try:
            ...
        except SomeException:
            tb = sys.exception().__traceback__
            raise OtherException(...).with_traceback(tb)
        ```

    \_\_traceback\_\_
    :   A writable field that holds the
        [traceback object](../reference/datamodel.html#traceback-objects) associated with this
        exception. See also: [The raise statement](../reference/simple_stmts.html#raise).

    add\_note(*note*)
    :   Add the string `note` to the exception’s notes which appear in the standard
        traceback after the exception string. A [`TypeError`](#TypeError "TypeError") is raised if `note`
        is not a string.

        Added in version 3.11.

    \_\_notes\_\_
    :   A list of the notes of this exception, which were added with [`add_note()`](#BaseException.add_note "BaseException.add_note").
        This attribute is created when `add_note()` is called.

        Added in version 3.11.

*exception*Exception
:   All built-in, non-system-exiting exceptions are derived from this class. All
    user-defined exceptions should also be derived from this class.

*exception*ArithmeticError
:   The base class for those built-in exceptions that are raised for various
    arithmetic errors: [`OverflowError`](#OverflowError "OverflowError"), [`ZeroDivisionError`](#ZeroDivisionError "ZeroDivisionError"),
    [`FloatingPointError`](#FloatingPointError "FloatingPointError").

*exception*BufferError
:   Raised when a [buffer](../c-api/buffer.html#bufferobjects) related operation cannot be
    performed.

*exception*LookupError
:   The base class for the exceptions that are raised when a key or index used on
    a mapping or sequence is invalid: [`IndexError`](#IndexError "IndexError"), [`KeyError`](#KeyError "KeyError"). This
    can be raised directly by [`codecs.lookup()`](codecs.html#codecs.lookup "codecs.lookup").

## Concrete exceptions

The following exceptions are the exceptions that are usually raised.

*exception*AssertionError
:   Raised when an [`assert`](../reference/simple_stmts.html#assert) statement fails.

*exception*AttributeError
:   Raised when an attribute reference (see [Attribute references](../reference/expressions.html#attribute-references)) or
    assignment fails. (When an object does not support attribute references or
    attribute assignments at all, [`TypeError`](#TypeError "TypeError") is raised.)

    The optional *name* and *obj* keyword-only arguments
    set the corresponding attributes:

    name
    :   The name of the attribute that was attempted to be accessed.

    obj
    :   The object that was accessed for the named attribute.

    Changed in version 3.10: Added the [`name`](#AttributeError.name "AttributeError.name") and [`obj`](#AttributeError.obj "AttributeError.obj") attributes.

*exception*EOFError
:   Raised when the [`input()`](functions.html#input "input") function hits an end-of-file condition (EOF)
    without reading any data. (Note: the [`io.TextIOBase.read()`](io.html#io.TextIOBase.read "io.TextIOBase.read") and
    [`io.IOBase.readline()`](io.html#io.IOBase.readline "io.IOBase.readline") methods return an empty string when they hit EOF.)

*exception*FloatingPointError
:   Not currently used.

*exception*GeneratorExit
:   Raised when a [generator](../glossary.html#term-generator) or [coroutine](../glossary.html#term-coroutine) is closed;
    see [`generator.close()`](../reference/expressions.html#generator.close "generator.close") and [`coroutine.close()`](../reference/datamodel.html#coroutine.close "coroutine.close"). It
    directly inherits from [`BaseException`](#BaseException "BaseException") instead of [`Exception`](#Exception "Exception") since
    it is technically not an error.

*exception*ImportError
:   Raised when the [`import`](../reference/simple_stmts.html#import) statement has troubles trying to
    load a module. Also raised when the “from list” in `from ... import`
    has a name that cannot be found.

    The optional *name* and *path* keyword-only arguments
    set the corresponding attributes:

    name
    :   The name of the module that was attempted to be imported.

    path
    :   The path to any file which triggered the exception.

    Changed in version 3.3: Added the [`name`](#ImportError.name "ImportError.name") and [`path`](#ImportError.path "ImportError.path") attributes.

*exception*ModuleNotFoundError
:   A subclass of [`ImportError`](#ImportError "ImportError") which is raised by [`import`](../reference/simple_stmts.html#import)
    when a module could not be located. It is also raised when `None`
    is found in [`sys.modules`](sys.html#sys.modules "sys.modules").

    Added in version 3.6.

*exception*IndexError
:   Raised when a sequence subscript is out of range. (Slice indices are
    silently truncated to fall in the allowed range; if an index is not an
    integer, [`TypeError`](#TypeError "TypeError") is raised.)

*exception*KeyError
:   Raised when a mapping (dictionary) key is not found in the set of existing keys.

*exception*KeyboardInterrupt
:   Raised when the user hits the interrupt key (normally `Control`-`C` or
    `Delete`). During execution, a check for interrupts is made
    regularly. The exception inherits from [`BaseException`](#BaseException "BaseException") so as to not be
    accidentally caught by code that catches [`Exception`](#Exception "Exception") and thus prevent
    the interpreter from exiting.

    Note

    Catching a `KeyboardInterrupt` requires special consideration.
    Because it can be raised at unpredictable points, it may, in some
    circumstances, leave the running program in an inconsistent state. It is
    generally best to allow `KeyboardInterrupt` to end the program as
    quickly as possible or avoid raising it entirely. (See
    [Note on Signal Handlers and Exceptions](signal.html#handlers-and-exceptions).)

*exception*MemoryError
:   Raised when an operation runs out of memory but the situation may still be
    rescued (by deleting some objects). The associated value is a string indicating
    what kind of (internal) operation ran out of memory. Note that because of the
    underlying memory management architecture (C’s `malloc()` function), the
    interpreter may not always be able to completely recover from this situation; it
    nevertheless raises an exception so that a stack traceback can be printed, in
    case a run-away program was the cause.

*exception*NameError
:   Raised when a local or global name is not found. This applies only to
    unqualified names. The associated value is an error message that includes the
    name that could not be found.

    The optional *name* keyword-only argument sets the attribute:

    name
    :   The name of the variable that was attempted to be accessed.

    Changed in version 3.10: Added the [`name`](#NameError.name "NameError.name") attribute.

*exception*NotImplementedError
:   This exception is derived from [`RuntimeError`](#RuntimeError "RuntimeError"). In user defined base
    classes, abstract methods should raise this exception when they require
    derived classes to override the method, or while the class is being
    developed to indicate that the real implementation still needs to be added.

    Note

    It should not be used to indicate that an operator or method is not
    meant to be supported at all – in that case either leave the operator /
    method undefined or, if a subclass, set it to [`None`](constants.html#None "None").

    Caution

    `NotImplementedError` and `NotImplemented` are not
    interchangeable. This exception should only be used as described
    above; see [`NotImplemented`](constants.html#NotImplemented "NotImplemented") for details on correct usage of
    the built-in constant.

*exception*OSError([*arg*])

*exception*OSError(*errno*, *strerror*[, *filename*[, *winerror*[, *filename2*]]])
:   This exception is raised when a system function returns a system-related
    error, including I/O failures such as “file not found” or “disk full”
    (not for illegal argument types or other incidental errors).

    The second form of the constructor sets the corresponding attributes,
    described below. The attributes default to [`None`](constants.html#None "None") if not
    specified. For backwards compatibility, if three arguments are passed,
    the [`args`](#BaseException.args "BaseException.args") attribute contains only a 2-tuple
    of the first two constructor arguments.

    The constructor often actually returns a subclass of `OSError`, as
    described in [OS exceptions](#os-exceptions) below. The particular subclass depends on
    the final [`errno`](#OSError.errno "OSError.errno") value. This behaviour only occurs when
    constructing `OSError` directly or via an alias, and is not
    inherited when subclassing.

    errno
    :   A numeric error code from the C variable `errno`.

    winerror
    :   Under Windows, this gives you the native
        Windows error code. The [`errno`](#OSError.errno "OSError.errno") attribute is then an approximate
        translation, in POSIX terms, of that native error code.

        Under Windows, if the *winerror* constructor argument is an integer,
        the [`errno`](#OSError.errno "OSError.errno") attribute is determined from the Windows error code,
        and the *errno* argument is ignored. On other platforms, the
        *winerror* argument is ignored, and the [`winerror`](#OSError.winerror "OSError.winerror") attribute
        does not exist.

    strerror
    :   The corresponding error message, as provided by
        the operating system. It is formatted by the C
        functions `perror()` under POSIX, and `FormatMessage()`
        under Windows.

    filename

    filename2
    :   For exceptions that involve a file system path (such as [`open()`](functions.html#open "open") or
        [`os.unlink()`](os.html#os.unlink "os.unlink")), [`filename`](#OSError.filename "OSError.filename") is the file name passed to the function.
        For functions that involve two file system paths (such as
        [`os.rename()`](os.html#os.rename "os.rename")), [`filename2`](#OSError.filename2 "OSError.filename2") corresponds to the second
        file name passed to the function.

    Changed in version 3.3: [`EnvironmentError`](#EnvironmentError "EnvironmentError"), [`IOError`](#IOError "IOError"), [`WindowsError`](#WindowsError "WindowsError"),
    [`socket.error`](socket.html#socket.error "socket.error"), [`select.error`](select.html#select.error "select.error") and
    `mmap.error` have been merged into `OSError`, and the
    constructor may return a subclass.

    Changed in version 3.4: The [`filename`](#OSError.filename "OSError.filename") attribute is now the original file name passed to
    the function, instead of the name encoded to or decoded from the
    [filesystem encoding and error handler](../glossary.html#term-filesystem-encoding-and-error-handler). Also, the *filename2*
    constructor argument and attribute was added.

*exception*OverflowError
:   Raised when the result of an arithmetic operation is too large to be
    represented. This cannot occur for integers (which would rather raise
    [`MemoryError`](#MemoryError "MemoryError") than give up). However, for historical reasons,
    OverflowError is sometimes raised for integers that are outside a required
    range. Because of the lack of standardization of floating-point exception
    handling in C, most floating-point operations are not checked.

*exception*PythonFinalizationError
:   This exception is derived from [`RuntimeError`](#RuntimeError "RuntimeError"). It is raised when
    an operation is blocked during interpreter shutdown also known as
    [Python finalization](../glossary.html#term-interpreter-shutdown).

    Examples of operations which can be blocked with a
    `PythonFinalizationError` during the Python finalization:

    * Creating a new Python thread.
    * [`Joining`](threading.html#threading.Thread.join "threading.Thread.join") a running daemon thread.
    * [`os.fork()`](os.html#os.fork "os.fork").

    See also the [`sys.is_finalizing()`](sys.html#sys.is_finalizing "sys.is_finalizing") function.

    Added in version 3.13: Previously, a plain [`RuntimeError`](#RuntimeError "RuntimeError") was raised.

    Changed in version 3.14: [`threading.Thread.join()`](threading.html#threading.Thread.join "threading.Thread.join") can now raise this exception.

*exception*RecursionError
:   This exception is derived from [`RuntimeError`](#RuntimeError "RuntimeError"). It is raised when the
    interpreter detects that the maximum recursion depth (see
    [`sys.getrecursionlimit()`](sys.html#sys.getrecursionlimit "sys.getrecursionlimit")) is exceeded.

    Added in version 3.5: Previously, a plain [`RuntimeError`](#RuntimeError "RuntimeError") was raised.

*exception*ReferenceError
:   This exception is raised when a weak reference proxy, created by the
    [`weakref.proxy()`](weakref.html#weakref.proxy "weakref.proxy") function, is used to access an attribute of the referent
    after it has been garbage collected. For more information on weak references,
    see the [`weakref`](weakref.html#module-weakref "weakref: Support for weak references and weak dictionaries.") module.

*exception*RuntimeError
:   Raised when an error is detected that doesn’t fall in any of the other
    categories. The associated value is a string indicating what precisely went
    wrong.

*exception*StopIteration
:   Raised by built-in function [`next()`](functions.html#next "next") and an [iterator](../glossary.html#term-iterator)'s
    [`__next__()`](stdtypes.html#iterator.__next__ "iterator.__next__") method to signal that there are no further
    items produced by the iterator.

    value
    :   The exception object has a single attribute `value`, which is
        given as an argument when constructing the exception, and defaults
        to [`None`](constants.html#None "None").

    When a [generator](../glossary.html#term-generator) or [coroutine](../glossary.html#term-coroutine) function
    returns, a new `StopIteration` instance is
    raised, and the value returned by the function is used as the
    [`value`](#StopIteration.value "StopIteration.value") parameter to the constructor of the exception.

    If a generator code directly or indirectly raises `StopIteration`,
    it is converted into a [`RuntimeError`](#RuntimeError "RuntimeError") (retaining the
    `StopIteration` as the new exception’s cause).

    Changed in version 3.3: Added `value` attribute and the ability for generator functions to
    use it to return a value.

    Changed in version 3.5: Introduced the RuntimeError transformation via
    `from __future__ import generator_stop`, see [**PEP 479**](https://peps.python.org/pep-0479/).

    Changed in version 3.7: Enable [**PEP 479**](https://peps.python.org/pep-0479/) for all code by default: a `StopIteration`
    error raised in a generator is transformed into a [`RuntimeError`](#RuntimeError "RuntimeError").

*exception*StopAsyncIteration
:   Must be raised by [`__anext__()`](../reference/datamodel.html#object.__anext__ "object.__anext__") method of an
    [asynchronous iterator](../glossary.html#term-asynchronous-iterator) object to stop the iteration.

    Added in version 3.5.

*exception*SyntaxError(*message*, *details*)
:   Raised when the parser encounters a syntax error. This may occur in an
    [`import`](../reference/simple_stmts.html#import) statement, in a call to the built-in functions
    [`compile()`](functions.html#compile "compile"), [`exec()`](functions.html#exec "exec"),
    or [`eval()`](functions.html#eval "eval"), or when reading the initial script or standard input
    (also interactively).

    The [`str()`](stdtypes.html#str "str") of the exception instance returns only the error message.
    Details is a tuple whose members are also available as separate attributes.

    filename
    :   The name of the file the syntax error occurred in.

    lineno
    :   Which line number in the file the error occurred in. This is
        1-indexed: the first line in the file has a `lineno` of 1.

    offset
    :   The column in the line where the error occurred. This is
        1-indexed: the first character in the line has an `offset` of 1.

    text
    :   The source code text involved in the error.

    end\_lineno
    :   Which line number in the file the error occurred ends in. This is
        1-indexed: the first line in the file has a `lineno` of 1.

    end\_offset
    :   The column in the end line where the error occurred finishes. This is
        1-indexed: the first character in the line has an `offset` of 1.

    For errors in f-string fields, the message is prefixed by “f-string: ”
    and the offsets are offsets in a text constructed from the replacement
    expression. For example, compiling f’Bad {a b} field’ results in this
    args attribute: (‘f-string: …’, (‘’, 1, 2, ‘(a b)n’, 1, 5)).

    Changed in version 3.10: Added the [`end_lineno`](#SyntaxError.end_lineno "SyntaxError.end_lineno") and [`end_offset`](#SyntaxError.end_offset "SyntaxError.end_offset") attributes.

*exception*IndentationError
:   Base class for syntax errors related to incorrect indentation. This is a
    subclass of [`SyntaxError`](#SyntaxError "SyntaxError").

*exception*TabError
:   Raised when indentation contains an inconsistent use of tabs and spaces.
    This is a subclass of [`IndentationError`](#IndentationError "IndentationError").

*exception*SystemError
:   Raised when the interpreter finds an internal error, but the situation does not
    look so serious to cause it to abandon all hope. The associated value is a
    string indicating what went wrong (in low-level terms). In [CPython](../glossary.html#term-CPython),
    this could be raised by incorrectly using Python’s C API, such as returning
    a `NULL` value without an exception set.

    If you’re confident that this exception wasn’t your fault, or the fault of
    a package you’re using, you should report this to the author or maintainer
    of your Python interpreter.
    Be sure to report the version of the Python interpreter (`sys.version`; it is
    also printed at the start of an interactive Python session), the exact error
    message (the exception’s associated value) and if possible the source of the
    program that triggered the error.

*exception*SystemExit
:   This exception is raised by the [`sys.exit()`](sys.html#sys.exit "sys.exit") function. It inherits from
    [`BaseException`](#BaseException "BaseException") instead of [`Exception`](#Exception "Exception") so that it is not accidentally
    caught by code that catches `Exception`. This allows the exception to
    properly propagate up and cause the interpreter to exit. When it is not
    handled, the Python interpreter exits; no stack traceback is printed. The
    constructor accepts the same optional argument passed to `sys.exit()`.
    If the value is an integer, it specifies the system exit status (passed to
    C’s `exit()` function); if it is `None`, the exit status is zero; if
    it has another type (such as a string), the object’s value is printed and
    the exit status is one.

    A call to [`sys.exit()`](sys.html#sys.exit "sys.exit") is translated into an exception so that clean-up
    handlers ([`finally`](../reference/compound_stmts.html#finally) clauses of [`try`](../reference/compound_stmts.html#try) statements) can be
    executed, and so that a debugger can execute a script without running the risk
    of losing control. The [`os._exit()`](os.html#os._exit "os._exit") function can be used if it is
    absolutely positively necessary to exit immediately (for example, in the child
    process after a call to [`os.fork()`](os.html#os.fork "os.fork")).

    code
    :   The exit status or error message that is passed to the constructor.
        (Defaults to `None`.)

*exception*TypeError
:   Raised when an operation or function is applied to an object of inappropriate
    type. The associated value is a string giving details about the type mismatch.

    This exception may be raised by user code to indicate that an attempted
    operation on an object is not supported, and is not meant to be. If an object
    is meant to support a given operation but has not yet provided an
    implementation, [`NotImplementedError`](#NotImplementedError "NotImplementedError") is the proper exception to raise.

    Passing arguments of the wrong type (e.g. passing a [`list`](stdtypes.html#list "list") when an
    [`int`](functions.html#int "int") is expected) should result in a `TypeError`, but passing
    arguments with the wrong value (e.g. a number outside expected boundaries)
    should result in a [`ValueError`](#ValueError "ValueError").

*exception*UnboundLocalError
:   Raised when a reference is made to a local variable in a function or method, but
    no value has been bound to that variable. This is a subclass of
    [`NameError`](#NameError "NameError").

*exception*UnicodeError
:   Raised when a Unicode-related encoding or decoding error occurs. It is a
    subclass of [`ValueError`](#ValueError "ValueError").

    `UnicodeError` has attributes that describe the encoding or decoding
    error. For example, `err.object[err.start:err.end]` gives the particular
    invalid input that the codec failed on.

    encoding
    :   The name of the encoding that raised the error.

    reason
    :   A string describing the specific codec error.

    object
    :   The object the codec was attempting to encode or decode.

    start
    :   The first index of invalid data in [`object`](functions.html#object "object").

        This value should not be negative as it is interpreted as an
        absolute offset but this constraint is not enforced at runtime.

    end
    :   The index after the last invalid data in [`object`](functions.html#object "object").

        This value should not be negative as it is interpreted as an
        absolute offset but this constraint is not enforced at runtime.

*exception*UnicodeEncodeError
:   Raised when a Unicode-related error occurs during encoding. It is a subclass of
    [`UnicodeError`](#UnicodeError "UnicodeError").

*exception*UnicodeDecodeError
:   Raised when a Unicode-related error occurs during decoding. It is a subclass of
    [`UnicodeError`](#UnicodeError "UnicodeError").

*exception*UnicodeTranslateError
:   Raised when a Unicode-related error occurs during translating. It is a subclass
    of [`UnicodeError`](#UnicodeError "UnicodeError").

*exception*ValueError
:   Raised when an operation or function receives an argument that has the
    right type but an inappropriate value, and the situation is not described by a
    more precise exception such as [`IndexError`](#IndexError "IndexError").

*exception*ZeroDivisionError
:   Raised when the second argument of a division or modulo operation is zero. The
    associated value is a string indicating the type of the operands and the
    operation.

The following exceptions are kept for compatibility with previous versions;
starting from Python 3.3, they are aliases of [`OSError`](#OSError "OSError").

*exception*EnvironmentError

*exception*IOError

*exception*WindowsError
:   Only available on Windows.

### OS exceptions

The following exceptions are subclasses of [`OSError`](#OSError "OSError"), they get raised
depending on the system error code.

*exception*BlockingIOError
:   Raised when an operation would block on an object (e.g. socket) set
    for non-blocking operation.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`EAGAIN`](errno.html#errno.EAGAIN "errno.EAGAIN"), [`EALREADY`](errno.html#errno.EALREADY "errno.EALREADY"),
    [`EWOULDBLOCK`](errno.html#errno.EWOULDBLOCK "errno.EWOULDBLOCK") and [`EINPROGRESS`](errno.html#errno.EINPROGRESS "errno.EINPROGRESS").

    In addition to those of [`OSError`](#OSError "OSError"), `BlockingIOError` can have
    one more attribute:

    characters\_written
    :   An integer containing the number of **bytes** written to the stream
        before it blocked. This attribute is available when using the
        buffered I/O classes from the [`io`](io.html#module-io "io: Core tools for working with streams.") module.

*exception*ChildProcessError
:   Raised when an operation on a child process failed.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`ECHILD`](errno.html#errno.ECHILD "errno.ECHILD").

*exception*ConnectionError
:   A base class for connection-related issues.

    Subclasses are [`BrokenPipeError`](#BrokenPipeError "BrokenPipeError"), [`ConnectionAbortedError`](#ConnectionAbortedError "ConnectionAbortedError"),
    [`ConnectionRefusedError`](#ConnectionRefusedError "ConnectionRefusedError") and [`ConnectionResetError`](#ConnectionResetError "ConnectionResetError").

*exception*BrokenPipeError
:   A subclass of [`ConnectionError`](#ConnectionError "ConnectionError"), raised when trying to write on a
    pipe while the other end has been closed, or trying to write on a socket
    which has been shutdown for writing.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`EPIPE`](errno.html#errno.EPIPE "errno.EPIPE") and [`ESHUTDOWN`](errno.html#errno.ESHUTDOWN "errno.ESHUTDOWN").

*exception*ConnectionAbortedError
:   A subclass of [`ConnectionError`](#ConnectionError "ConnectionError"), raised when a connection attempt
    is aborted by the peer.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`ECONNABORTED`](errno.html#errno.ECONNABORTED "errno.ECONNABORTED").

*exception*ConnectionRefusedError
:   A subclass of [`ConnectionError`](#ConnectionError "ConnectionError"), raised when a connection attempt
    is refused by the peer.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`ECONNREFUSED`](errno.html#errno.ECONNREFUSED "errno.ECONNREFUSED").

*exception*ConnectionResetError
:   A subclass of [`ConnectionError`](#ConnectionError "ConnectionError"), raised when a connection is
    reset by the peer.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`ECONNRESET`](errno.html#errno.ECONNRESET "errno.ECONNRESET").

*exception*FileExistsError
:   Raised when trying to create a file or directory which already exists.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`EEXIST`](errno.html#errno.EEXIST "errno.EEXIST").

*exception*FileNotFoundError
:   Raised when a file or directory is requested but doesn’t exist.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`ENOENT`](errno.html#errno.ENOENT "errno.ENOENT").

*exception*InterruptedError
:   Raised when a system call is interrupted by an incoming signal.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`EINTR`](errno.html#errno.EINTR "errno.EINTR").

    Changed in version 3.5: Python now retries system calls when a syscall is interrupted by a
    signal, except if the signal handler raises an exception (see [**PEP 475**](https://peps.python.org/pep-0475/)
    for the rationale), instead of raising `InterruptedError`.

*exception*IsADirectoryError
:   Raised when a file operation (such as [`os.remove()`](os.html#os.remove "os.remove")) is requested
    on a directory.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`EISDIR`](errno.html#errno.EISDIR "errno.EISDIR").

*exception*NotADirectoryError
:   Raised when a directory operation (such as [`os.listdir()`](os.html#os.listdir "os.listdir")) is requested on
    something which is not a directory. On most POSIX platforms, it may also be
    raised if an operation attempts to open or traverse a non-directory file as if
    it were a directory.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`ENOTDIR`](errno.html#errno.ENOTDIR "errno.ENOTDIR").

*exception*PermissionError
:   Raised when trying to run an operation without the adequate access
    rights - for example filesystem permissions.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`EACCES`](errno.html#errno.EACCES "errno.EACCES"),
    [`EPERM`](errno.html#errno.EPERM "errno.EPERM"), and [`ENOTCAPABLE`](errno.html#errno.ENOTCAPABLE "errno.ENOTCAPABLE").

    Changed in version 3.11.1: WASI’s [`ENOTCAPABLE`](errno.html#errno.ENOTCAPABLE "errno.ENOTCAPABLE") is now mapped to
    `PermissionError`.

*exception*ProcessLookupError
:   Raised when a given process doesn’t exist.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`ESRCH`](errno.html#errno.ESRCH "errno.ESRCH").

*exception*TimeoutError
:   Raised when a system function timed out at the system level.
    Corresponds to `errno` [`ETIMEDOUT`](errno.html#errno.ETIMEDOUT "errno.ETIMEDOUT").

Added in version 3.3: All the above [`OSError`](#OSError "OSError") subclasses were added.

See also

[**PEP 3151**](https://peps.python.org/pep-3151/) - Reworking the OS and IO exception hierarchy

## Warnings

The following exceptions are used as warning categories; see the
[Warning Categories](warnings.html#warning-categories) documentation for more details.

*exception*Warning
:   Base class for warning categories.

*exception*UserWarning
:   Base class for warnings generated by user code.

*exception*DeprecationWarning
:   Base class for warnings about deprecated features when those warnings are
    intended for other Python developers.

    Ignored by the default warning filters, except in the `__main__` module
    ([**PEP 565**](https://peps.python.org/pep-0565/)). Enabling the [Python Development Mode](devmode.html#devmode) shows
    this warning.

    The deprecation policy is described in [**PEP 387**](https://peps.python.org/pep-0387/).

*exception*PendingDeprecationWarning
:   Base class for warnings about features which are obsolete and
    expected to be deprecated in the future, but are not deprecated
    at the moment.

    This class is rarely used as emitting a warning about a possible
    upcoming deprecation is unusual, and [`DeprecationWarning`](#DeprecationWarning "DeprecationWarning")
    is preferred for already active deprecations.

    Ignored by the default warning filters. Enabling the [Python
    Development Mode](devmode.html#devmode) shows this warning.

    The deprecation policy is described in [**PEP 387**](https://peps.python.org/pep-0387/).

*exception*SyntaxWarning
:   Base class for warnings about dubious syntax.

    This warning is typically emitted when compiling Python source code, and usually won’t be reported
    when running already compiled code.

*exception*RuntimeWarning
:   Base class for warnings about dubious runtime behavior.

*exception*FutureWarning
:   Base class for warnings about deprecated features when those warnings are
    intended for end users of applications that are written in Python.

*exception*ImportWarning
:   Base class for warnings about probable mistakes in module imports.

    Ignored by the default warning filters. Enabling the [Python
    Development Mode](devmode.html#devmode) shows this warning.

*exception*UnicodeWarning
:   Base class for warnings related to Unicode.

*exception*EncodingWarning
:   Base class for warnings related to encodings.

    See [Opt-in EncodingWarning](io.html#io-encoding-warning) for details.

    Added in version 3.10.

*exception*BytesWarning
:   Base class for warnings related to [`bytes`](stdtypes.html#bytes "bytes") and [`bytearray`](stdtypes.html#bytearray "bytearray").

*exception*ResourceWarning
:   Base class for warnings related to resource usage.

    Ignored by the default warning filters. Enabling the [Python
    Development Mode](devmode.html#devmode) shows this warning.

    Added in version 3.2.

## Exception groups

The following are used when it is necessary to raise multiple unrelated
exceptions. They are part of the exception hierarchy so they can be
handled with [`except`](../reference/compound_stmts.html#except) like all other exceptions. In addition,
they are recognised by [`except*`](../reference/compound_stmts.html#except-star), which matches
their subgroups based on the types of the contained exceptions.

*exception*ExceptionGroup(*msg*, *excs*)

*exception*BaseExceptionGroup(*msg*, *excs*)
:   Both of these exception types wrap the exceptions in the sequence `excs`.
    The `msg` parameter must be a string. The difference between the two
    classes is that `BaseExceptionGroup` extends [`BaseException`](#BaseException "BaseException") and
    it can wrap any exception, while [`ExceptionGroup`](#ExceptionGroup "ExceptionGroup") extends [`Exception`](#Exception "Exception")
    and it can only wrap subclasses of `Exception`. This design is so that
    `except Exception` catches an `ExceptionGroup` but not
    `BaseExceptionGroup`.

    The `BaseExceptionGroup` constructor returns an [`ExceptionGroup`](#ExceptionGroup "ExceptionGroup")
    rather than a `BaseExceptionGroup` if all contained exceptions are
    [`Exception`](#Exception "Exception") instances, so it can be used to make the selection
    automatic. The `ExceptionGroup` constructor, on the other hand,
    raises a [`TypeError`](#TypeError "TypeError") if any contained exception is not an
    `Exception` subclass.

    **CPython implementation detail:** The `excs` parameter may be any sequence, but lists and tuples are
    specifically processed more efficiently here. For optimal performance,
    pass a tuple as `excs`.

    message
    :   The `msg` argument to the constructor. This is a read-only attribute.

    exceptions
    :   A tuple of the exceptions in the `excs` sequence given to the
        constructor. This is a read-only attribute.

    subgroup(*condition*)
    :   Returns an exception group that contains only the exceptions from the
        current group that match *condition*, or `None` if the result is empty.

        The condition can be an exception type or tuple of exception types, in which
        case each exception is checked for a match using the same check that is used
        in an `except` clause. The condition can also be a callable (other than
        a type object) that accepts an exception as its single argument and returns
        true for the exceptions that should be in the subgroup.

        The nesting structure of the current exception is preserved in the result,
        as are the values of its [`message`](#BaseExceptionGroup.message "BaseExceptionGroup.message"),
        [`__traceback__`](#BaseException.__traceback__ "BaseException.__traceback__"), [`__cause__`](#BaseException.__cause__ "BaseException.__cause__"),
        [`__context__`](#BaseException.__context__ "BaseException.__context__") and
        [`__notes__`](#BaseException.__notes__ "BaseException.__notes__") fields.
        Empty nested groups are omitted from the result.

        The condition is checked for all exceptions in the nested exception group,
        including the top-level and any nested exception groups. If the condition is
        true for such an exception group, it is included in the result in full.

        Added in version 3.13: `condition` can be any callable which is not a type object.

    split(*condition*)
    :   Like [`subgroup()`](#BaseExceptionGroup.subgroup "BaseExceptionGroup.subgroup"), but returns the pair `(match, rest)` where `match`
        is `subgroup(condition)` and `rest` is the remaining non-matching
        part.

    derive(*excs*)
    :   Returns an exception group with the same [`message`](#BaseExceptionGroup.message "BaseExceptionGroup.message"), but which
        wraps the exceptions in `excs`.

        This method is used by [`subgroup()`](#BaseExceptionGroup.subgroup "BaseExceptionGroup.subgroup") and [`split()`](#BaseExceptionGroup.split "BaseExceptionGroup.split"), which
        are used in various contexts to break up an exception group. A
        subclass needs to override it in order to make `subgroup()`
        and `split()` return instances of the subclass rather
        than [`ExceptionGroup`](#ExceptionGroup "ExceptionGroup").

        [`subgroup()`](#BaseExceptionGroup.subgroup "BaseExceptionGroup.subgroup") and [`split()`](#BaseExceptionGroup.split "BaseExceptionGroup.split") copy the
        [`__traceback__`](#BaseException.__traceback__ "BaseException.__traceback__"),
        [`__cause__`](#BaseException.__cause__ "BaseException.__cause__"), [`__context__`](#BaseException.__context__ "BaseException.__context__") and
        [`__notes__`](#BaseException.__notes__ "BaseException.__notes__") fields from
        the original exception group to the one returned by `derive()`, so
        these fields do not need to be updated by `derive()`.

        ```
        >>> classMyGroup(ExceptionGroup):
        ...     defderive(self, excs):
        ...         return MyGroup(self.message, excs)
        ...
        >>> e = MyGroup("eg", [ValueError(1), TypeError(2)])
        >>> e.add_note("a note")
        >>> e.        >>> e.        >>> try:
        ...    raise e
        ... except Exception as e:
        ...    exc = e
        ...
        >>> match, rest = exc.split(ValueError)
        >>> exc, exc.__context__, exc.__cause__, exc.__notes__
        (MyGroup('eg', [ValueError(1), TypeError(2)]), Exception('context'), Exception('cause'), ['a note'])
        >>> match, match.__context__, match.__cause__, match.__notes__
        (MyGroup('eg', [ValueError(1)]), Exception('context'), Exception('cause'), ['a note'])
        >>> rest, rest.__context__, rest.__cause__, rest.__notes__
        (MyGroup('eg', [TypeError(2)]), Exception('context'), Exception('cause'), ['a note'])
        >>> exc.__traceback__ is match.__traceback__ is rest.__traceback__
        True
        ```

    Note that `BaseExceptionGroup` defines [`__new__()`](../reference/datamodel.html#object.__new__ "object.__new__"), so
    subclasses that need a different constructor signature need to
    override that rather than [`__init__()`](../reference/datamodel.html#object.__init__ "object.__init__"). For example, the following
    defines an exception group subclass which accepts an exit\_code and
    constructs the group’s message from it.

    ```
    classErrors(ExceptionGroup):
       def__new__(cls, errors, exit_code):
          self = super().__new__(Errors, f"exit code: {exit_code}", errors)
          self.exit_code = exit_code
          return self

       defderive(self, excs):
          return Errors(excs, self.exit_code)
    ```

    Like [`ExceptionGroup`](#ExceptionGroup "ExceptionGroup"), any subclass of `BaseExceptionGroup` which
    is also a subclass of [`Exception`](#Exception "Exception") can only wrap instances of
    `Exception`.

    Added in version 3.11.

## Exception hierarchy

The class hierarchy for built-in exceptions is:

```
BaseException
 ├── BaseExceptionGroup
 ├── GeneratorExit
 ├── KeyboardInterrupt
 ├── SystemExit
 └── Exception
      ├── ArithmeticError
      │    ├── FloatingPointError
      │    ├── OverflowError
      │    └── ZeroDivisionError
      ├── AssertionError
      ├── AttributeError
      ├── BufferError
      ├── EOFError
      ├── ExceptionGroup [BaseExceptionGroup]
      ├── ImportError
      │    └── ModuleNotFoundError
      ├── LookupError
      │    ├── IndexError
      │    └── KeyError
      ├── MemoryError
      ├── NameError
      │    └── UnboundLocalError
      ├── OSError
      │    ├── BlockingIOError
      │    ├── ChildProcessError
      │    ├── ConnectionError
      │    │    ├── BrokenPipeError
      │    │    ├── ConnectionAbortedError
      │    │    ├── ConnectionRefusedError
      │    │    └── ConnectionResetError
      │    ├── FileExistsError
      │    ├── FileNotFoundError
      │    ├── InterruptedError
      │    ├── IsADirectoryError
      │    ├── NotADirectoryError
      │    ├── PermissionError
      │    ├── ProcessLookupError
      │    └── TimeoutError
      ├── ReferenceError
      ├── RuntimeError
      │    ├── NotImplementedError
      │    ├── PythonFinalizationError
      │    └── RecursionError
      ├── StopAsyncIteration
      ├── StopIteration
      ├── SyntaxError
      │    └── IndentationError
      │         └── TabError
      ├── SystemError
      ├── TypeError
      ├── ValueError
      │    └── UnicodeError
      │         ├── UnicodeDecodeError
      │         ├── UnicodeEncodeError
      │         └── UnicodeTranslateError
      └── Warning
           ├── BytesWarning
           ├── DeprecationWarning
           ├── EncodingWarning
           ├── FutureWarning
           ├── ImportWarning
           ├── PendingDeprecationWarning
           ├── ResourceWarning
           ├── RuntimeWarning
           ├── SyntaxWarning
           ├── UnicodeWarning
           └── UserWarning
```

---

## Bibliography

1. [Built-in Exceptions](https://docs.python.org/3/library/exceptions.html)